---
title: The burnout machine 
date: 2026-04-24
---

There are a lot of posts around about the quality (or lack thereof) of LLM-produced code. I would like to focus on another point of view, the human price around this issue. First, let’s agree that even if some people say they are able to produce good output with LLMs, that is not the reality for everybody. Let’s also agree that some people are producing so much code that it’s impossible for a human to review, and that software is made up of details. Behaviour that cannot be easily checked from outside. 

The first aspect of the human price is the expectations for output. Quality is a second thought, and features that would take weeks are now supposed to be delivered in days (when not in hours). This means people have to change the subject they are working on at a much higher frequency. We are not talking anymore about working on something for a couple of days and letting that subject run in the background, to discover during a shower how to improve the whole solution. No, nothing like that. Worse, now discussions are generated by LLM, while before you would spend time reading someone's argument, learning, researching, you will see people throwing “oh, I asked Claude, and this huge useless text is the output, please process it because I was too lazy to read and write with my own words what I agree with”. Because you need to deliver features much faster, you also don’t have the time to diggest all that text wall, so you throw it at LLM, ask for a summary. A day of work that would look like: doing some coding, reading specs and taking some pauses to read news, now it’s just a 8 hours sesssion trying to produce output.

The second aspect is the quality gates. If someone on your team is producing one million changes per day, and you have code review, it means that they are throwing the burden of quality on everybody’s shoulder You have two options: give up on quality and blindly say “ship it”, or read and ask for improvements. Of course, you won’t be delivering features when doing it, so you will be called out: “Why is your output lower than the rest?”. So you don’t have any incentive for keeping quality, hit the “merge button”  and go back to try to deliver your set of features.

The third aspect is a consequence of the previous two: quality is lower, and the number of features per day is huge. If you have worked on software engineering, you know what that equals to. So many bugs. Omg, so many of them. And bugs have higher priority; someone is suffering in production. I hope you are not oncall, because now, not only do you have to fix it during your business hours, but you need to mitigate an issue at 3AM, with a code so terrible, written by an LLM with so many useless abstractions that you decide to light a cigarette, after years without one. Is this life now? Well, probably. Finish this mitigation fast; tomorrow, you wake up early to keep delivering broken features.






